---
title: 10054
file: 10054.md
source: https://brulescorp.com/brwiki2/index.php?title=10054
category: 90-reference
subcategory: 90-reference/error-codes
kind: error-code
related: [Client Server, messagebox, 10038, BRListener.conf]
---
`Client Server` connection is broken.

==Problem==
Receive a `messagebox` with a title of **Error** and a body stating **Client-Server error 10054 receiving data.**

==Resolution==
Check the BRConfig.log (You must turn logging on).
Review the "Launch Line" (Something like this).
   Security process has started with command c:\...\BRServer.exe -c:\...\WBConfig.sys, startdir c:\...\, logfile c:\...\brconfig.log, loglevel 10, stderr file NULL, socket handle 120, anonymous NULL
   There will most likely be another line after it explaining the reason for the problem.

*See also Error `10038`
**Remember that while Port 8555 is typically used to initiate the inbound connection to BRListener, Ports 1024-65535 will be used to connect by to BRClient.

*Most Windows Sockets 2 functions do not return the specific cause of an error when the function returns. For information, see the Handling Winsock Errors topic.
**http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/desktop/ms740668%28v=vs.85%29.aspx

*Perhaps this is caused by a bad path in `BRListener.conf`

*Mapped Network drives WILL NOT work as the BRServer session does not have mappings.

*UNC names will work properly, but significantly affect performance.

==Troubleshooting Tips==

Host:  Make sure the server name is correct, in particular, you may have moved to a new server or IP address

Label: This is case sensitive, and remember "Spaces" and perhaps other special characters require "" (Quotes)
