---
title: 4122
file: 4122.md
source: https://brulescorp.com/brwiki2/index.php?title=4122
category: 90-reference
subcategory: 90-reference/error-codes
kind: error-code
related: [Internal, Header, Source File, program, 4.2, S/23-MODE, Open, Option]
---
**Error:** 4122

**Description:** Invalid access for file type

**Details:** Mismatch between file type and type of access attempted.
- When opening an table as `Internal`, this error means that the `Header` is damaged.
- This error could result from an attempt to direct information to a printer or display file when the file has been opened internal.
- Similarly, a statement could be attempting to call help with a file name that does not represent a help file.
- This error could also result from an attempt to open the same file twice from the same workstation as internal and either external or display. After a file is opened internal at a workstation, only internal is allowed for additional opens on the same file.
- Another cause of this error occurs when an attempt is made to open a program file as a key file.
- You've attempted to List < a `Source File`
- A `program` file won't load in a br version prior to `4.2` because you saved it in `4.2` previously # Correct the OPEN statement.
- (`S/23-MODE` is ON) An `Open` statement tried to open a key file as an internal file.
- (S/23-MODE is ON) An OPEN statement tried to open an internal file as a display file.
- (S/23-MODE is ON) An OPEN statement tried to open a key file as an internal file.
- (S/23-MODE is ON) An OPEN statement tried to open a program file as a display file.
- add `Option` 60 to your 4.2 BR installation and reload and replace the program file, than older versions of BR should be again able to load and run the program.
