---
title: 4271
file: 4271.md
source: https://brulescorp.com/brwiki2/index.php?title=4271
category: 90-reference
subcategory: 90-reference/error-codes
kind: error-code
related: [Operating System Error, LINPUT, External Files External]
---
**Error:** 4271

**Description:** `Operating System Error` 71

**Details:** Incomplete record received/short record found. Incomplete record: retry the `LINPUT`. Short record: copy the file to a work area using the -D option to remove the partial record, then copy back the work file to the original.If the above description clearly does not apply to your situation, there is a possibility that you are receiving operating system error 71 Network request not accepted. See your Operating System manual for more information on dealing with this error.

This error can also occur quite legitimately when reading files in `External Files External` mode. Typically such files consist of a data stream of unknown length. When processing blocks of data in such files, the record length is set to chunk size and each READ accesses the next chunk of data. It is up to the program to decipher the actual layout of the data. In such cases, the last record read is often a fraction of the record length (chunk size) and an error 4271 is generated by the read.

When an error 4271 occurs reading an External file, simply save the value of CNT and erform a REREAD into the same buffer as the read. The data length will be the saved CNT value and the remainder of the buffer will be set to binary zeroes.
