---
title: 4.20ja
file: 4.20ja.md
source: https://brulescorp.com/brwiki2/index.php?title=4.20ja
category: 90-reference
subcategory: 90-reference/limits-constants
kind: constant
related: [Beta, NOMAXIMIZE, parent=none, log level, PEM, brlistener.conf, LIST, HILIGHT BAR, INPUT, ON ATTN]
---
Status:  `Beta`

Please use a `:Category:Release 4.1|prior` version for deployment until this on has a status of stable.

The prior versions were `:Category:Release 4.0|4.0` and `:Category:Release 4.1|4.1`.

= 4.20 Release J = 

* `NOMAXIMIZE` will eliminate the maximize button on `parent=none` windows.

* At `log level` greater than 7, we log when a `PEM` control adds to the BR keyboard buffer. 

* If CAPTION= is used in the `brlistener.conf`, the brclient will use this caption when displaying the logon username and password window. 

* `LIST` doesn't display the `HILIGHT BAR` until the first `INPUT` is processed. 

== Change `ON ATTN` to mean "ON Ctrl-A" and provide `OPTION` 65 to ignore ON ATTN altogether ==

The IBM System/32 treated F10 as the attention key. BR changed that to Ctrl-C which was then reassigned to Ctrl-A. At some point years ago the ON ATTN trap in BR stopped working, so programs that had ON ATTN IGNORE in them were still interruptible. In `4.3` we corrected the failure which unintentionally made many legacy programs uninterruptable. So OPTION 65 was provided to ignore such statements altogether.

== Transparency Support In PDF Printing ==

Previous editions did not support see through print fiends in PDF printing. It is, however, supported in NWP and HP supports it as well. This has been added to BR PDF printing. It will require a new pdflib. So BR will now support either `pdflib2` or `pdflib3`, whichever is present.

There will not be a 64 bit pdflib issued for the foreseeable  future. If you need to do PDF printing, use the 32 bit client which works fine on 64 bit machines and with 64 bit BR servers.

== Work File Naming == 

Work files other than EDIT work files have the same names they have in the past except their WSID also includes the SESSION ID digit and they are subject to the following WORKPATH enhancement:

* The fullpath portion of the existing WORKPATH statement is now optional.
* A second optional parameter is supported [LOGIN_NAME] ( case insensitive ). This causes all work files (other that EDIT files) to be in the format filenameSESSIONID.login_name.suffix
e.g.  WBSPL0211.Margaret.02

Note that SESSIONID is retained and login_name is inserted with an extra period.

     WORKPATH  [LOGIN_NAME]     ( just specify workfile name inclusion )
               - or -
     WORKPATH  C:\MYAPP\TMP  [LOGIN_NAME]    ( workpath plus name inclusion ) 

Files that are affected by WORKPATH:
* BRSPOOL    - client spool files
* WBSPL        - server spool files
* PDF
* SORT workfiles
* INDEX workfiles
* Other temporary workfiles that have been opened with wsid

EDIT work file names are not subject to WORKPATH name specifications. They also do not include WSID or SESSION.  BR keeps workfiles separate for the same program name located in different directories, but does NOT attempt to separate multiple EDITing sessions either by the same user or different users.

== CLIENT_CURENT_DIR Changes == 

The third parameter of the `DRIVE` statement will apply to `client-server` operations. It will still be ignored for standard model operations. The third parameter, if it begins with \\ or X: ( or any mapped drive letter followed by colon) will indicate the OS full path ( relative paths not allowed ) to the initial client
directory for the drive referenced by that drive statement. In effect this will provide a client fullpath for each drive statement. Essentially, the third parameter specifies for the client what the second parameter specifies for the server.

If this parameter is not specified or does not begin with \\ or X:, then the client current directory will still be the client startup directory.

CLIENT_CURRENT_DIR will support the following parameters:
* Full path – specifies use this path for all @: ( single colon ) file references
* SYNC – Treat each BR Drive individually and when you CD on the server perform the same CD on the client for that respective drive.
* OFF – Use the client startup directory for all @: references.

The default mode is SYNC.

== Changes to the INSERT Configuration Statement == 

Unchanged
   INSERT ON | OFF - sets mode to Insert or Overtype
   INSERT MIN_LENGTH 10 - regulates separate long and short insert settings

New
   INSERT [ON|OFF] NON_PERSISTENT - resets to specified setting upon field exit
   INSERT [ON|OFF] SESSION_PERSISTENT - resets at the beginning of each BR invokation
   INSERT [ON|OFF] PERSISTENT - user setting persists across BR invokations

The default mode is ON PERSISTENT.

== Brlistener Changes == 

The listeners will now recognize a qualifying prefix on CONF file statements. This supports having different listeners active at the same time. This permits testing in production client-server environments.

@release = 1.2        PORT=8555
@release = 2.0        PORT=8557
@release < 2.0 EXECUTABLE = /ads/sys/br.d/brserver
@release >= 2.0 EXECUTABLE = /ads/sys/br.d/brserver.new

== Persistent Login – Brlistener Release 2.0 == 

A Client session ID is stored in the registry on the client side and associated with the user login name. This is maintained in memory by the BRlistener along with the user's login-name and password. The listener first checks the user's client session ID before prompting for login info.

== New Text Entry Field Attribute == 

A new string ( C/V/G ) field leading attribute ^ENTER-CRLF is supported as follows.

 ^ENTER-CRLF causes the ENTER key to add CRLF characters to the data and to go to a new line left justified. The cursor will retrace the data when backspace or left-arrow is keyed, meaning the on-screen CRLF characters are represented by moving the cursor, instead of allowing it to rest on invisible CRLF characters.

^ENTER-LF may be specified in lieu of ^ENTER-CRLF. When that is the case, carriage returns entered are represented in the data as newline (LF) single characters.

Tabs are entered into the text. Shift-tab is ignored.

Home, End, Up-Arrow and Down-Arrow all operate relative to the current line as opposed to operating on the text box as a whole.

Depressing the Control key causes the following keys to operate in the normal string entry mode:
* Enter – Returns control to the BR program
* Tab – Goes to the next control
* Shift-Tab – Goes to the prior control
* Home – Goes to the beginning of data or the first field
* End – Goes to the end of data or the last field
* Up-Arrow – Goes to the prior control
* Down-Arrow – Goes to the next control

A new system function is defined called `CURPOS`. This returns the position of the cursor within the data when control is returned to the program. This does not include end-of-line spaces that have not been entered, but does include invisible CRLF characters.
